---
title: Thoughts on women and the priesthood
date: 2013-04-30
slug: thoughts-on-women-and-the-priesthood
---

April 2013

This past week, a local radio talk show interviewed some women who have been trying to send an organized message of sorts to the leaders of the LDS church, asking that they seriously consider giving the priesthood to women. I have listened to the podcast.

Linda was curious to know what I thought about all of this. She said she’d discussed it with her mother, and I know that in a ladies get-together on my side of the family, the subject also got explored. I have some female relatives that consider themselves feminists, in some sense of the word. I am also aware of some people that I love who have suffered very difficult experiences at the hands of father figures, which has led me to ponder fatherhood and priesthood roles for a long time. Also, I have some children who are black, so the announcement in 1978 that the priesthood could be extended to all worthy male members has a personal significance to me that might never have settled on my heart otherwise.

None of this gives me any special insight, of course; I’m just trying to explain why I felt that it was worth taking an hour to record my thoughts for anybody who’s interested.

<!--more-->The first thing I’d like to say is that I believe any exploration of the role of men and women and priesthood, and of their relationship to God, can be a worthy and uplifting one. I say “can” because I think it is also possible for this area of doctrinal question--or any area, really--to lead people to anger, pride, and criticism. I have vague memories of Sonia Johnson vocally dissenting during sustainings in General Conference; that sort of animus doesn’t seem like a good target. The women on the podcast sounded sincere and humble to me, and the women that I personally know who are interested in this topic are some of the most humble, kind, and faithful people in my life--so I am not voicing my concern as an oblique way to criticize. I am just hoping that in all our discussions, we (myself included) remember that Christ doesn’t want disputations about points of His doctrine; He considers that so antithetical to His way that He warned about it immediately, in his first sermon during a visit to the Nephites (3 Ne 12).

The second thing I’d like to say is that I believe the gospel is still being restored. LDS doctrine teaches us to believe in continuous revelation, but I think we sometimes imagine that the Lord is done revealing <i>doctrines</i>, and that any revelations He gives us in the future will be about points of procedure, or about tactical responses to world conditions. While I expect those kinds of revelations to happen more often than the grandiose doctrine-expanding kind, I also believe that the Lord “will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the kingdom of God.” Note the “great and important.”

Today, the LDS church has enough core doctrine, and enough clarity about that core doctrine, for any child of our Heavenly Father to be saved. This is a tremendous blessing, and I am deeply grateful for it. However, I must respectfully disagree with anyone who claims that we have answers to <i>every</i> question of substance. We have <i>enough</i> answers to <i>enough</i> of the big questions. But there are many gaps in our understanding. To cite one very simple example, we are taught that “in the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees” (D&C 131:1). The meaning and relationship between these three divisions is never explained. That is what I call an unanswered question. Not having the answer doesn’t prevent me from making good choices in my life, but it is an area where I would like to know more.

There are many, many examples of unanswered questions like these. What is the afterlife like? We know it is a place of rest for the righteous (Alma 41), where they experience much happiness and peace. We know that missionary work takes place there. We have anecdotes that are shared in church, in which a loved one on the other side appears to impart loving advice or to make a request that temple work be done. But there is so much we don’t know. Do we live in the same kind of family units that we have here, with parents and children in a home of some sort? Do people who spoke English on Earth still speak English on the other side, or will I be able to freely converse with ancestors who lived in England a millenium before Shakespeare? How much will the cultural traditions from this earth life carry across? Do people gather for meals? Can they see us as we go about our daily business? Do they have 7 days constituting a week in their calendar? How is age reflected (or not reflected) in the appearance or behavior of spirits?

Hopefully that list is illustrative of my thinking. All of these questions interest me; in asking them, I am motivated by curiosity and an honest desire for more light. I’m not critical of anyone because they don’t have answers for me. I’m not trying to advance a particular worldview, or insisting on an answer that I like. And not all of the questions are of equal importance to me.

I highlight the matter of unanswered questions because I believe the doctrines of gender, priesthood, marriage, and motherhood are prime examples. We know some core things about these topics, but there is much--very much--that we don’t know. I’m not sure why the Lord has not revealed more about them. Perhaps it’s because the world is <i>so far</i> out of whack on these topics that having publicly-taught doctrines that dramatically expand our views would trigger massive persecution or hardship for the faithful. Perhaps it’s because the faithful themselves are not ready or have not lived up to the light we already have. Or perhaps it’s because we, as a body of believers, have not asked enough. Perhaps there are other reasons that nobody knows about but God. And perhaps it’s some combination of all of the above.

I would observe here that I find a profound contrast between the scriptural injunction to ask--as in: “ask, and ye shall receive”-- and the cautionary tale about folks steadying the ark (see 2 Sam 6:6-7 and D&C 85:8). The injunction to ask is one of the most oft-repeated commandments in the scriptures--perhaps <i>the most</i> repeated. The LDS church began because a boy read James 1:5, took courage from James’ promise that the Lord would not upbraid, and obeyed the Lord’s injunction. Repeatedly.

Clearly the Lord wants us to treasure up the words of eternal life in our hearts, and He wants us to ask Him for more light and knowledge. He has promised, repeatedly, that He will respond with a mighty outpouring (see, for example, Joel 2:28 and D&C 121:33).

However, the Lord doesn’t want people to steady the ark. I imagine the salient difference between asking and steadying is that in one case, we are admitting our lack of understanding, and humbly asking for more; in the other case, we are proposing to correct the Lord’s bad management. Perhaps the differences are more subtle or deep.

At any rate, I reason from this that if we, as followers of Christ, would like more light and knowledge about gender, priesthood, marriage, and motherhood, then it would be pleasing to the Lord for us to ask. This asking can be private--personal prayers, fasting, scripture study, or temple pondering all seem like great ideas. It can be more public--perhaps asking the brethren for more doctrinal insight is a good way. I think of letters that I have heard discussed from the pulpit in general conference, in which lonely single sisters pour out their hearts to the brethren about the difficulty of the path they are on. I think of parents writing of how their hearts ache for a son or daughter who struggles with same-sex attraction. These kinds of pleadings from the people are faithful, and I think they will ultimately cause the heavens to shake for our good. On the other hand, sending petitions to the brethren asking them to make a specific change to procedure makes me a bit uncomfortable, because A) I don’t think we have enough clarity about the doctrinal issues involved; B) I think it’s a bit presumptuous for us to make a conclusion about proper policy until we have that doctrinal clarity; C) using public and worldly channels to communicate with leaders the Lord has given us, when more private and less worldly channels could work equally well, feels unnecessarily strident.

I am not criticizing the women that are making these petitions, because I don’t know that any of the concerns I just raised are characteristic of their thinking. It is possible that they are not asking for a policy change, only making a heartfelt petition for further light and knowledge. And it is possible that more private channels would not or have not been effective. If so, then I think it is possible that what they’re doing is appropriate. I am just saying I’m uncomfortable because I can imagine some mindsets where that behavior would be, in my mind, dangerous.

Anyway, that’s a bit of a tangent to the rest of my thoughts on the subject. Back to the heart of it...

In the early days of the church, women sometimes gave blessings. Eliza R. Snow was known as “the prophetess,” I believe. Joseph Smith organized the Relief Society with statements that allude to priesthood. Some cite this as evidence that women exercising the priesthood should be part of the restoration. I think it’s an interesting point, but I don’t think the reasoning is very strong. In the early days of the church, sacrament meetings were sometimes held on weekdays. Baptisms for the dead were done in a river. Wilford Woodruff and his wife Phoebe were rebaptized because they felt a need for spiritual cleansing, and because Phoebe wasn’t feeling well; Wilford notes in his journal that he felt the rebaptisms had been very helpful. I don’t consider any of these practices to be an endpoint of gospel understanding, but rather evidence that the restoration was not yet complete.

The scriptures speak of daughters that prophesy, and attach the title of “prophetess” to a number of faithful women. Deborah served as the political leader of the Israelites, and may have had some religious duties as well. I also consider this data to be interesting, but to have unclear implications.

What I consider by far the most compelling evidence that our doctrine about priesthood may eventually be extended in some respect has to do with the temple. Today, duly called women officiate in portions of priesthood ordinances in the temple. It is hard to characterize that service as anything other than a priestly function--and for those who have been to the temple, I think pondering the verbiage may yield some interesting insights. I find it interesting that the role of women in the temple predates modern feminism, women priests in the episcopal church, and similar thinking by well over a hundred years. The Lord does not need lessons in progressive thinking from the world.

The most profound and mysterious doctrinal questions in the gospel, in my mind, revolve around the nature of our Heavenly Mother. That She exists is clearly church doctrine, but almost nothing else about Her has been revealed. How is She involved in our lives? I have sometimes seen a sunset or a mountain meadow full of flowers and imagined a feminine hand in the design. I am certain that it will not just be masculine arms that enfold us about eternally in their love in a glorious future day. And I am certain that She is a being of perfect love and infinite power, Heavenly Father’s equal partner and subservient to no one. I will not list other questions that I have about Her, or speculate, because I think it would distract from the flow of my thoughts. Suffice it to say that this is an area where I think Heavenly Father might be pleased to have us yearn to know more; He cannot possibly blame us for wanting to be close to the Being that He adores more than any other in the universe.

Women have not been treated as equals of men in most of the world’s cultures, for virtually all of recorded history. This is sad. It hurts the women who suffer, and it deprives the world of much beauty, wisdom, and leadership. I readily admit that billions of lifetimes have included or now include discrimination, disrespect, and unfair oppression based purely on gender. Sometimes that cultural baggage manifests in the church. Any time I hear a story about some boneheaded male insisting that women must obey because they’re bound to “follow the priesthood,” I cringe. Modern church leaders have repeatedly condemned this false idea, and the Lord’s own feelings on the subject are excruciatingly clear in D&C 121. “No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood” doesn’t leave much wiggle room. Women have had no stronger advocate, anywhere in history, than Jesus Christ. And He says that I should be like Him, which (in my mind) makes me a feminist in the best sense. I am thrilled that women gave prayers at general conference, and I welcome any other developments along those lines that might happen.

The <i>real</i> doctrine, it seems to me, is that the Lord expects us all--male and female--to recognize one another’s inherent worth, and to uphold one another in patience and faith. The hand cannot say to the foot, “I have no need of thee.” And we strengthen the feeble knees and lift up the hands that hang down, and mourn with those that mourn, without any regard to gender. A Relief Society president or Primary President is not my direct leader, but I still raise my hand to sustain her, and I am duty bound to show that sustaining by my words and actions and prayers. There is certainly a responsibility for us to listen to the prophet or a stake president or a bishop, but that responsibility applies just as much to men as to women. Wives should sustain their husbands, but there is an <i>equal</i> responsibility for husbands to sustain their wives.

Having admitted that mistreatment and disrespect are a problem, I need to note that I don’t believe patriarchy (at least in the church) is inherently evil. To understand why, let’s do a thought experiment about a naive sort of “give the women the priesthood” scenario. Suppose that women could be ordained deacons at 12, teachers at 14, and so forth. Suppose women could be bishops and patriarchs and stake presidents and temple sealers and apostles and the prophet. In this scenario, biological and social fatherhood without the priesthood is the complement and emotional analog for men to biological and social motherhood for women, and the priesthood is simply an administrative duty that the genders share equally.

What would such a world be like?

For one, every worthy young woman would be expected to serve a mission. That is a priesthood duty.

12-year-old girls would be out knocking on doors to collect fast offerings. Would this be on alternate months to the male deacons, or would you have male and female companionships taking alternate routes, like in the mission field? Who would be responsible to divvy out the work across gender boundaries, hold deacons accountable, report back?

I am not sure this feels good to me.

Could a man be the Primary President? After all, motherhood has no privileged standing with respect to children in the ward...

Could a man be the Relief Society president?

“Ah,” you say. “Of course we wouldn’t do <i>that</i>. There’d still be separate organizations. Women preside over the women’s organization; men preside over the men’s. The Relief Society would have elders and high priests in it, and so would the men’s organization. The bishop could be called from the ranks of either one.”

I think this violates the notion of quorums in the scriptures in some pretty fundamental ways; we are taught that quorums are composed of those with the same priesthood office, and that the president of that quorum should sit in council with the members and teach them their duties. Quorums are supposed to consist of peers who understand and support one another through shared experiences and challenges. It’s pretty hard to do that if your quorum membership spans genders. I can imagine all kinds of concerns with propriety if we had a male president of female elders, or vice versa.

Which brings up the notion of presidencies. In the episcopal church that allows women priests, the priests function more or less solo. They may have an advisory council, but there is no equivalent to an LDS presidency.

In our church, if women held the priesthood, whether or not quorums crossed gender lines, you’d have some sticky issues with presidency. Counselors would have to be the same gender as the president, because the trio (or pairs from the trio) sits in council, in private, for long hours away from their family. Same for the ward clerk and executive secretary, since they often provide a second adult to allow a bishop to interview without being solo. Integrated presidencies would be out of the question.

The same would be true at the stake level, and in area and mission presidencies, and in the presiding bishopric and the presidents of the 70 and in the First Presidency.

You might get around this awkward gender boundary/propriety issue by creating separate but parallel priesthood offices; perhaps there’s a female office called “ministering sister” that’s the equivalent of an “elder”, able to do the same things, only within a quorum of women. Maybe you’d have a female office called “laurel” that’s got a presidency with duties similar to those of a “priest”...

Hmm, that sounds kind of familiar...

What I conclude from this thought experiment is that there would be enormous logistical problems in church organization if we had the sort of naive arrangement that goes along with the “give women the priesthood” idea. I am not using this as an argument that women priesthood holders are anti-doctrinal, just observing that it would be complicated. If you compare this to the change where all worthy males received the priesthood, I think you’ll agree that the change to ordain women would have much wider organizational and procedural repercussions.

I give it as my opinion that the women’s organizations we already have are a far better way to organize women than the naive and chaotic intermingling in our thought experiment, and that if we ever have a doctrinal revelation about ordaining women, it will likely use organizations that are already in place, such that (maybe, for example) Relief Society becomes a quorum, Laurels becomes a quorum, and so forth. If you agree, then ordaining women wouldn’t just be a policy change; it would involve the unfolding of new doctrine about the meaning of quorums. There would have to be a complement to D&C 107 that enumerates the responsibilities of the “ministering sister” quorum, for example. I could imagine Relief Society presidencies sitting on the stand at church. I can imagine “Sister Elaine Dalton” being called “President Elaine Dalton” in General Conference, or the Relief Society meeting being called a “sixth session” of General Conference just like the current priesthood session.

I’d like to go back to the question of a man being primary president for a minute, to make a different observation. I don’t like the idea of ordaining women <i>in a naive way, without further doctrinal insight</i>, because I think it’s based on a false premise that men and women are virtually interchangeable. I have heard that some LDS feminists say that biological and social and spiritual motherhood are in every way analogous to biological and social and spiritual fatherhood, and that the priesthood is quite an independent question.

I don’t agree.

Biological fatherhood is basically an act of sperm donorship. Biological motherhood is far, far more profound. Not only are two bodies and two emotional constitutions transformed during pregnancy, but there is also the act of nursing and a host of biological changes that continue for months after birth. A woman who has become a mother knows it. A man who has become a father might have no clue.

I don’t think that fatherhood without priesthood is as rich of an experience as motherhood without priesthood. I just don’t. Subtract priesthood from fatherhood, and I think you’re left with an anemic sort of relationship. Sure, it has much potential for service and love, but I don’t think it’s a very good analog for motherhood at all. They are not equally rich experiences.

All of which leads me to conclude that if women were to receive the priesthood, we’d need some doctrinal elaboration on the nature of fatherhood and masculinity as well. Many feminists in the world are actually quite anti-male. I think that is far, far less the case in the church, but I still get occasional glimpses of assumptions that I think are a bit one-sided. In an eagerness to amplify and clarify the role of women (which I think is 100% good, and 100% in harmony with the Lord’s desires), there is sometimes a lack of pondering about the implications for men. I have never--not once in my life--recited something in my Sunday meetings that tells me I am a beloved son of God, that I have a divine nature, that I have individual worth. There is no such litany for men. Certainly we know that we have such a status, doctrinally, but because priesthood is connected with worthiness, there is far less emphasis on intrinsic worth. If a presiding role is not in some sense inherently masculine, and the nurturing role is not inherently masculine, then what is?

Some feminists get restive when they hear LDS women talk about how they’re put on a pedestal because of motherhood. They point out (correctly) that this is a bit hollow for childless women. But I don’t hear them talking about how hollow it might be for men to a) have no emphasis on inherent worth; b) be taught that priesthood doesn’t define them either. In saying this, I am not trying to complain or make debate points; I’m just trying to show that this is a broad doctrinal issue, not just a narrow matter of women’s roles and outdated assumptions about leadership.

Anyway, bottom line for me is that I would welcome additional light. I don’t believe the position of women in the church today is bad. I think women have significant responsibilities and are generally held in high esteem. In a major contrast with the blacks-and-the-priesthood issue, nobody is unable to enjoy temple blessings, serve missions, or have meaningful ministering opportunities because women don’t formally exercise the priesthood. However, I can see some places where traditions might change to good advantage, and I would welcome those changes if they came. I love the women in my life and want them to be happy and independent and 100% my peers and equals, and I am confident that this is the feeling in the Lord’s heart as well. I believe we’ll see the Lord’s vision for His children unfold in such a way that the future will be more glorious than we can imagine, and that despite stretches to our patience today, we will not look upon imperfections in today’s church organization as a major unhappiness when we have the benefit of a longer perspective.